## Why Hong Kong Localists should revisit Leftism

 

As the Hong Kong election draws near, the schism between the Localists and their so-called “Leftist Idiot” counterparts is again underscored in both their campaigns and on the social media, to the extent that killing each other off has become more important than winning over the pro-establishment parties. In this article I would like to make one simple argument: that the antagonism Localists hold towards the Left is misguided, and as a matter of fact, the majority of Localist concerns are better answered and resolved by a Leftist framework. I would try to show that there are multiple areas that these two frameworks actually overlap, and in instances where they differ, the Leftist framework fares better. As such, Localists would do well to look closer at their concerns and reconsider what principles are they and should they be holding. 

**A brief overview of the two frameworks**

For the purpose of this essay, I would like to, without going into difficult and often contradictory philosophical depths, define what I mean by a Leftist framework and by a Localist framework. I would like to make it as simple as possible so as to be general enough to include the various factions within both frameworks. (As you can see, I am adopting the colloquial usage of the terms instead of their academic counterparts) 

By a Leftist framework, I mean a framework that highlights the Capitalist macro-structure being the root of our current plight. It does not excuse the government from its responsibilities, but points to government’s alliance with or support for Capitalists as the main problem. Most importantly, it points to the macro-structure of how the government and society at large operate and highlights the mode of operation as the root of the problem. 

By a Localist framework, I refer to a framework that points to a distinctive set of Hong Kong local identities and interests being undermined by ruling powers who are alien to both local identities and interests. In Hong Kong, just like in most other places where Localism/Nationalism is on the rise, it also points the problem of the influx of migrants and tourists that do not share local identities nor interests thus pose a direct threat to eroding and diluting them. Or in more direct language, that Hong Kong has been re-colonized, now a colony exploited by the Mainland Government and Mainland colonists. The solution it has is to allow those who share local identities and interests become the sovereign of the city, and place restrictions (if not expel) those who fail to assimilate. 

These two frameworks logically overlap in the sense that taking back the control of the government would allow the power to create the restructuring that Leftists desire. The difference is that the Leftist solutions do not require the controlling power of the government, while political control does not necessitate any Leftist reforms. 

There is another point of contestation that I would like that avoid right now: the part about movement strategies. It has become the obsession of various parties and netizens to accuse each other of being (or not being) enough radical/violent. One prominent association with “Leftists” in the current local discourse is that they are strictly limited to peaceful “ineffective” means of protest that achieves nothing other than furnishing their own reputation. I would like to set aside this dispute for another day, but I think it would suffice for now to point out that theoretically these frameworks are to explain what are the structural problems we are facing thus what should be the end-goals we should hope for, and that both peaceful and violent strategies are not mutually exclusive for either framework. I see no principled objection to a violent Leftist or a peaceful Localist. I also do not see how movements with different strategies contradict each other fundamentally, and think that mutual shaming each other on their adopted strategies is just a manifestation of insolvent political strategies or immature mentalities, and a waste of their limited political capital. 

I would like now to test and compare the strengths of these two frameworks with two major problems Localists have raised: our economic woes and the erosion of our individual and communal identities. 

**Our Current Economic Woes**

There are many economic problems under discussion right now, among them, the more major ones would be: absurdly high housing prices that are unaffordable for most local teenagers; insufficient welfare and labour right protections (absence of maximum working hour, a minimum wage that cannot catch up with inflation and various public service providers such as MTR hiking prices for profit motives), high costs of living, wasteful infrastructure projects and stagnant or even declining employment and promotion opportunities. 

**Localist Explanations**

So what is the plausible explanation for the continuous entrenchment of such problems? 

I would like to first dispel two Localist arguments that I think would not stand serious empirical examination.  

The first is that Mainland immigrants are now rushing into Hong Kong to feed on our welfare system, imposing a huge financial strain on our system such that we are incapable of supporting local citizens. The major claim is that they come in and do not work but simply feed on our unemployment subsidies. However, in 2014, out of the 250,054 individuals under the Comprehensive Social Security Assistance (CSSA) Scheme (the scheme for those who are unemployed or underemployed), only 19,127 are mainland immigrants under seven years of residency in 2014, which makes up only 7.6% of the cases (1), and in turn only takes up 0.4% of the total public expenditure. This indicates that new mainland immigrants hardly comprise a significant factor in straining our welfare. It is also worth noting that it is the government that increased the threshold for applying the CSSA scheme from 1 year to 7 years in 2004, but the new threshold was declared unconstitutional by the High Court of Hong Kong in 2013. This further proves that it is not in the incentive of the government to be transferring “our wealth” to these new immigrants. (2)

The second claim is that it is mainland investors that have driven our houses to insane prices. However this probably is no longer applicable since the implementation of Buyer’s Stamp Duty in 2012 ( a duty on residential properties for non-permanent resident buyers). As a matter of fact, the second season in 2016 has seen the highest proportion of Chinese buyers in the Hong Kong property market, yet that merely accounts for 9% of the total transaction and 16.3% of the total cost of transaction. (3) Perhaps it is more telling that while the amount of Mainland buyers has been dropping since 2012 the housing prices have only been rising since. (4) While this does not eliminate mainland buyers as a factor, their role in pushing and keeping housing prices absurdly high is at best marginal. 

Now on to the stronger Localist arguments, which I would then be comparing to the Leftist framework.  

The first claim is that the PRC government, in order to control the Hong Kong political economic landscape, has formed an alliance with both foreign and Mainland firms.In that process of gaining that favour, the HKSAR government has sacrificed the interests of local citizens in order to offer various incentives to those firms. To the extent this claim is persuasive, it overlaps with the Leftist framework. However, I would argue that the process of pandering to the interests of capitalists have started long before the return of Hong Kong, something the Localist framework cannot capture. 

The second claim is that the influx of mainland tourists had led to the homogenisation of Hong Kong’s urban landscape. In order to cater to the preferences of these tourists, now Hong Kong has been filled up by homogeneous malls that feature nothing but pharmacies and luxury brands, and in that process, killed off community stores and other monumental symbols that comprise Hong Kong locals’ collective memories and social lives. 

**The Context of Leftist Explanation: Hong Kong’s Economic Role**

These two claims do warrant some credit, and in order to answer them, I would now first turn to the Leftist framework. The role of Hong Kong as an international finance centre (IFC) was established by the British government. However, in order to establish its attractiveness, the government has to seek what David Harvey termed as monopoly rent. Monopoly rent basically means that the government has to establish traits in Hong Kong that allow it to win over other potential candidates such as Singapore, Tokyo and Shanghai. Its convenient location as the doorway to Mainland China was useful, but by itself an insufficient condition. In order to establish Hong Kong as a finance centre, the colonial has established a low partial income tax system (since 1940s) and a positive non-intervention policy (since 1971), largely unchanged even after 1997. This has three important implications that can lead us to explaining our current economic plights. 

**Leftist Explanation: Housing Prices**

The first is on why we are facing unaffordable housing prices right now.  

The Hong Kong government has “been practicing a high land price policy, selling only a limited amount of land to commercial developers each year at a high price while reserving the majority of land in the hands of the government. One reason for that is to finance the government and compensate for the loss of revenue due to low income tax and profit tax. However, land sales shares were in most years around 10 to 15% of the government revenue only, so while this definitely acts as a considerable factor, is not the major one. (5)

The second reason is that landed capital must be treated with sophistication if Hong Kong in the past had to acquire and now has to retain its position as IFC. How do we make sure that capital disproportionately flows into Hong Kong? One way is to build up the expectation for investors. The controlled sales of land allows properties to capture high expectations, which in turn drives up prices then attracts further waves of investment for expansion of nearby facilities, then the government can sell another limited portion of land situated within that well-developed area and capture even higher expectations, and the circular accumulation goes on and on. (6)

The third reason is that of the increasing specialisation of Hong Kong financial industries. Part of Hong Kong’s initial strength as a financial center before China’s modernisation is that it is the major gateway for transferral of capital and goods between China and the west. However this started to change in the 1980s as manufacturing industries moved away from Hong Kong to the Guangdong Province and Hong Kong became a mere re-export centre, and in the 1990s even the re-export role has been taken by the increasing number of open ports along coastal China. The stagnation and decline of these industries means that many of the traditional activities of banks in Hong Kong also became irrelevant. From the 1990s to the first decade of the 21st century, loans both domestic and foreign, inflows of capital and capital sent aboard have all plummeted. Hong Kong banks have repositioned themselves as intermediary sectors, but also increasingly drove themselves into investment, shares and stocks, and other financial institutions and services, especially mutual funds. (7) The conclusion of this is that Hong Kong’s financial institutions have become increasingly linked to speculative investments, and it is then in the interest of both the government and financial institutions to keep the housing prices, the indicator of the largest piece of speculative investment in Hong Kong, at a steady rising rate to keep the financial industry afloat. Thus seen in this light, the previous “spicy measures” such as Buyer’s Stamp Duty, Special Stamp Duty and Double Stamp Duty are measures to prevent the prices from going up or down too quickly for the sake of the financial industry instead of for those who are in need of housing. 

The fourth reason is that the government’s non-interventionist market policy, mixed with certain archaic policies has allowed estate developers to render any efforts of the government meaningless. The British government’s peculiar relationship with the New Territories land lords in the 19th century has bred a set of regulations that govern over any transformation of agricultural or abandoned land into urban or residential land use. Based on this context, the major estate developers have been accumulating land without transforming them into houses to suppress the supply of houses so houses are always sell at a price higher than the immediately previous market price. (8) However, the government’s belief in the non-interventionist policies (and the interest in a steadily rising housing price) and the desire to feed on narratives that the price is driven by greedy mainland speculators has led the government to adopt only policies that punish and deter the buyer, which in essence has no effect since the developers can control the supply and effectively the pricing of houses. 

**Leftist Explanation: Community Life and Public Service**

The second is on the homogenization of our community life and the deficit in our public service providers. 

On this issue we must first bring up the public sector reforms under the umbrella idea of New Public Management, which began in 1989, and consolidated in 1992 under governor Chris Pattern. New Public Management is the product of Neoliberalism in the 1970s, which basically emphasizes the undesirability of a big government and believes that the government should reform itself following the principles of the market. (of course, if you like, this can also be traced back to Hong Kong colonial policy of never allowing expenses to exceed revenue) Within which the most influential factor I would like to discuss here is the theory of Transaction Cost Economics, which states that non-specific jobs should be contracted out from the government so that the government could better define its organizational boundaries thus lower the overall transaction cost. Notice that the entire reform is in principle in line with the business model that the Hong Kong government is following. 

It is under this context that a multitude of government services are privatised and contracted out. We get a large number of semi-official government bodies that receive a one-time fund or a limited continuous fund from the government and then are required to run a self-sustaining budget, and an even larger number of services that are just directly or indirectly contracted out to private corporations. We would but briefly look at a few of them. 

The first is that of Link Reit, the private corporation that now runs our shopping malls. Shopping malls in and around public housing estates, prior to 2005, were managed by the Housing Authority. (which is already a semi-official government agency that is tasked with providing affordable public housing for the poor yet, paradoxically, has to commit to the principle of self-financing) These shopping malls featured a variety of community stores, selling (at a low price) stationery, herbal tea, local snacks and various wet market goods, and often are the geographical points for social links to be constructed and maintained within the local communities. However, in 2002, the Housing Authority was blamed for running these malls inefficiently (with a disproportional focus on “hygiene”) and with a financial deficit. The proposed solution is to sell all its shopping malls and car parks to a private company Link Reit and subsequently makes it a listed company. The moment it was listed on the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong, the stock prices have risen immediately to a total of 34.5 billion dollars, which in itself became a justification to both the public and the majority of legislators at that time. The support was so overwhelmingly “bipartisan”, that when Albert Chan moved to suspend the privatization, the motion was voted down almost unanimously by both the pro-establishment and pan-democrat factions, and extremely interestingly, those who supported the suspension were accused by the public as anti-localists and anti-Hong Kong interests. (9)

The rest may seem like common sense but there is more to it as well. While the Link greatly improved the managerial efficiency and “hygiene” of these shopping malls by applying the same luxurious shopping mall model to every single local mall, it also greatly increased again and again the rent of stores in its malls even at the risk of not having any shops open in some malls, in effect closing down all community stores and replacing them with chain stores owned by local tycoons or multinational corporations. Now the Localists may ask, how does the Link hold this atrocious monopoly, if not for the influx of rich Mainland tourists? 

The understanding of this would be better facilitated when you take into account the development of the New Towns, or alternatively coined “satellite towns”, which started in the 1950s. The idea is that in order to accommodate the large amount of new immigrants who are either homeless or crowded in slums, the government would develop in the New Territories new towns that are designed in completely rationalistic manner. In these towns, land use would be carefully crafted so work, residence, and leisure would not overlap in chaotic manners such as that in the old parts of town in Kowloon or Hong Kong Island. This is in opposition to the old model of having stores on the ground floor and houses on the upper levels. The result of this is the eradication of street stores in these New Towns and shops are merely confined to designed shopping malls. This model are then re-applied to the old towns where old areas are constantly demolished and reconstructed under the same manner. 

Under this structure, when the Link was given the monopoly over community shopping malls, it basically was given the monopoly over all commercial premises in the region. The shops that operate in the malls also then have a semi-monopoly over the purchasing options of the local residents, provided then they can conform to a business model that would allow a profit margin sufficient in paying the high rent. The conclusion is that only chain stores with mass production can survive in these areas, and they can only survive by raising their prices of goods to exorbitant levels so that they can afford their rent. Most residents, with limited time and resources, have nowhere to turn to but to succumb to this structure. (10) This is only exacerbated when the stores on the streets in old areas are also absorbed by these companies and models of business.  

The complete privatisation of Mass Transit Railway (MTR) in 2000 has further this process with its reliance on developing the commercial properties within and around the stations and incorporating them into large shopping complexes to earn profit. The conclusion is that the influx of mainland tourists has at best partially decided the sub-types of chain stores to be bought into those malls, but not the nature of them. 

The second is the limitless areas of service that are privatised. While there are certain services that continue to run well, the set of services that have taken the biggest hit is that which caters to groups without economical and political power in Hong Kong. One prime example would be the case of street washing, contracted out to private corporations by the Food and Environmental Hygiene Department. Under the current model, monitoring by the government is often done only partially and in more well-off geographical zones, leaving the poor districts which are invisible in the political landscape dirty and uncovered. Moreover, the contracting system also allows the government to shun responsibility from preventing the exploitation of sanitarian workers. The fact that the bid is offer usually to the lowest bidder (who can promise to clean up the largest amount of area with the lowest budget) and that the contracted corporation would only be earning profit by suppressing their expenses so that there would be a large enough margin between their cost and the budget given by the government means that they would often force undertrained and underpaid sanitarian workers to take up much wider zones than humanly possible. (with their situation only partially improving due to the latter implementation of minimum wage) 

The continuous emphasis on privatising various public services have led public services to place an ever larger emphasis on reducing costs over all other concerns, and often limit their efficiency to areas which are visible. (visible to the sense that they would affect groups which have economic or political power) 

**Provisional Conclusions**

What I want to establish with the above claims is not to deny that the government is in an alliance with the capitalists. What I want to prove is that this alliance and this mode of governance predate 1997 and will most likely continue even if the Hong Kong administration is granted with more sovereignty. It is also wrong for the Localists to say that the events above do not work for the interests of the local population. It is just that they merely profit a certain sector of the population, namely, those who work in and control the financial and investment sectors of the economy. I also wish to show that the role of Mainland tourists and immigrants is not decisive in shaping the economic and social pains we face right now. I would also like to posit that the alliance between capitalists and the current administration is not stable, and that it is possible to crack the alliance even without acquiring a localist version of federal or independent state. However, I have not been able to touch upon the question of the shaping and undermining of our Hong Kong identities yet, and this essay has already become longer than I expected. I would reserve this part along the part on identity for the second part of the essay, and end this with the provisional conclusion that decrying the PRC-Mainlanders-HKSAR-Capitalists alliance as evil would not be to explain away our current plights, but that we would need a complete overhaul of the current economic and political structure we are so used to, and envisage an alternative version of it. That is the urgent discussion we should be having now. 

1.  ”Statistics on Comprehensive Social Security Assistance, 2004 to 2014”, Hong Kong Monthly Digest of Statistics 

2.  Of course we could use a more detailed research on the relation between the economic contribution of these immigrants and their usage of the more extensive welfare network, something not within my current capacities. However it is worth noting that according to the 2011 Census Report, while only 57% of mainland immigrants under 7 year of residency were working in 2014, which is slightly lower than the local rate of 67%, 90.5% of these immigrants lived under the same domestic households with local residents, meaning that they have been very likely contributing as housewives or househusbands, contributions that are not captured in current labour statistics. 

3.  [http://hk.centanet.com/home/ArticleTemplate4.aspx?id=69404](http://l.facebook.com/l.php?u=http://hk.centanet.com/home/ArticleTemplate4.aspx?id=69404&h=eAQFTEqqt&s=1)

4.  [http://www.bochk.com/dam/investment/bocecon/SY2014022(sc).pdf](http://l.facebook.com/l.php?u=http://www.bochk.com/dam/investment/bocecon/SY2014022(sc).pdf&h=GAQFH5Zld&s=1)

5.  “Availability, Affordability and Volatility: the case of Hong Kong Housing Market” by Charles Leung & Edward Tang has an interesting discussion of how high land price has no direct linkage to high housing price. 

6.  For this argument I am indebted to David Harvey’s *Rebel Cities*.  

7.  “Hong Kong’s Transformation as a Financial Center”, David R. Meyer 

8.  In 2002, the four major estate developers were holding 79 million square feet of abandoned agricultural land. In 2011, the number has risen to 101 million square feet. See “Availability, Affordability and Volatility: the case of Hong Kong Housing Market.” 

9.  The only 8 exceptions were Lee Cheuk-yan, Chan Yuen-han, Leung Yiu-chung, Lau Chin-shek, Emily Lau, Albert Chan, Frederick Fung and Albert Cheng. 

10.  Lately it has been reported that a lot of housewives in Tin Shui Wai would rather spend hours to go to Mainland and buy their daily necessities there because it is so expensive to buy it in the shopping malls around where they live. Of course, a lot of families with all members working full-time jobs would not have that option.